add: #22006 on USDT (#341)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2021-05-26-#22006.md

---
layout: pr
date: 2021-05-26
title: "Tracing: first tracepoints and documentation on User-Space, Statically Defined Tracing (USDT)"
pr: 22006
authors: ["0xB10C"]
components: ["utils/log/libs"]
host: "0xB10C"
status: upcoming
commit:
---

## Notes

### Context

- User-Space, Statically Defined Tracing (USDT) allows peeking into runtime internals at statically defined tracepoints of user-space applications (Bitcoin Core in our case).
- Build support and `TRACEx` macros based on [systemtaps] `sys/sdt.h` for USDT were merged in [#19866].
- Issue [#20981] discusses potential tracepoints.

[systemtaps]: https://sourceware.org/systemtap/wiki
[#19866]: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19866
[#20981]: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/20981

### Tracepoints and tracing scripts

- We can hook into the tracepoints with tracing scripts via the Linux kernel.

> - If we don't hook into the tracepoints, then they are [NOP]s and have little to no performance impact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If we don't hook into the tracepoints, then they are [NOPs] and have little to no performance impact.
```

> - The tracepoints can pass data back to the tracing script, which contains the tracing logic (just printing the data, collecting statistics, alerting, visualization, ...).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The tracepoints can pass data back to the tracing script, which contains the tracing logic, e.g. to collect statistics, print or visualize data, give alerts, etc.
```

> - Tracepoints need to be somewhat generic to allow for reusability in different tracing scripts, but they also need a clear use case. There is no need in plastering the code with (unused) tracepoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tracepoints need to be somewhat generic to allow for reusability in different tracing scripts, but they also need a clear use case. There is no need to plaster the code with (unused) tracepoints.
```

> - There are currently two main tools for writing USDT scripts. [bpftrace] for one-liners and short scripts and [BPF compiler collection (BCC)] e.g. with the Python wrapper for complex scripts. Other tools with USDT support are under development.

Reviewer: s/scripts./scripts:/

and maybe make a list
```diff
-- There are currently two main tools for writing USDT scripts. [bpftrace] for one-liners and short scripts and [BPF compiler collection (BCC)] e.g. with the Python wrapper for complex scripts. Other tools with USDT support are under development.
+- There are currently two main tools for writing USDT scripts:
+    - [bpftrace] for one-liners and short scripts
+    - [BPF compiler collection (BCC)], e.g. with the Python wrapper for complex scripts
+    - Other tools with USDT support are under development.
```

[eBPF]: https://ebpf.io

```
                ┌──────────────────┐            ┌──────────────┐
                │ tracing script   │            │ bitcoind     │
                │==================│      2.    │==============│
                │  eBPF  │ tracing │      hooks │              │
                │  code  │ logic   │      into┌─┤►tracepoint 1─┼───┐ 3.
                └────┬───┴──▲──────┘          ├─┤►tracepoint 2 │   │ pass args
            1.       │      │ 4.              │ │ ...          │   │ to eBPF
    User    compiles │      │ pass data to    │ └──────────────┘   │ program
    Space    & loads │      │ tracing script  │                    │
    ─────────────────┼──────┼─────────────────┼────────────────────┼───
    Kernel           │      │                 │                    │
    Space       ┌──┬─▼──────┴─────────────────┴────────────┐       │
                │  │  eBPF program                         │◄──────┘
                │  └───────────────────────────────────────┤
                │ eBPF kernel Virtual Machine (sandboxed)  │
                └──────────────────────────────────────────┘

> 1. The tracing script complies the eBPF code and loads the eBFP program into a kernel VM

Reviewer: compiles

2. The eBPF program hooks into one or more tracepoints
3. When the tracepoint is called, the arguments are passed to the eBPF program
4. The eBPF program processes the arguments and returns data to the tracing script
```

> - More information on eBPF:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More information on eBPF:
```

- [collabora.com: An eBPF overview, part 1: Introduction](https://www.collabora.com/news-and-blog/blog/2019/04/05/an-ebpf-overview-part-1-introduction/)
- [collabora.com: An eBPF overview, part 2: Machine & bytecode](https://www.collabora.com/news-and-blog/blog/2019/04/15/an-ebpf-overview-part-2-machine-and-bytecode/)
- [Brendan D. Gregg's blog posts, and book on on eBPF](http://www.brendangregg.com/)
- [Brendan D. Gregg: Linux bcc/BPF Node.js USDT Tracing](http://www.brendangregg.com/blog/2016-10-12/linux-bcc-nodejs-usdt.html)

### Examples

- The PR includes examples and documentation on how to run them.

> - For building Bitcoin Core with USDT support, you need the `sys/std.h` headers (when present, USDT support is [automatically] compiled in). On Debian-like systems you can install them with `apt install systemtap-sdt-dev` (this is not documented yet).

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "you can install them" refers to here, installing headers seems an odd formulation. It auto-adds them?

`apt show systemtap-sdt-dev` returns this:

This package contains header file and executable (dtrace) that
 can be used to add static probes into userspace applications
 for use with SystemTap.

Author: I'm changing this to

```suggestion
- For building Bitcoin Core with USDT support, you need the `sys/std.h` headers (when present, USDT support is [automatically] compiled in). On Debian-like systems you can install the package `systemtap-sdt-dev` (this is not documented yet).
```

                │  └───────────────────────────────────────┤
                │ eBPF kernel Virtual Machine (sandboxed)  │
                └──────────────────────────────────────────┘

1. The tracing script compiles the eBPF code and loads the eBFP program into a kernel VM
2. The eBPF program hooks into one or more tracepoints
3. When the tracepoint is called, the arguments are passed to the eBPF program
4. The eBPF program processes the arguments and returns data to the tracing script
```

More information on eBPF:
- [collabora.com: An eBPF overview, part 1: Introduction](https://www.collabora.com/news-and-blog/blog/2019/04/05/an-ebpf-overview-part-1-introduction/)
- [collabora.com: An eBPF overview, part 2: Machine & bytecode](https://www.collabora.com/news-and-blog/blog/2019/04/15/an-ebpf-overview-part-2-machine-and-bytecode/)
- [Brendan D. Gregg's blog posts, and book on on eBPF](http://www.brendangregg.com/)
- [Brendan D. Gregg: Linux bcc/BPF Node.js USDT Tracing](http://www.brendangregg.com/blog/2016-10-12/linux-bcc-nodejs-usdt.html)

### Examples

- The PR includes examples and documentation on how to run them.

> - For building Bitcoin Core with USDT support, you need the `sys/std.h` headers (when present, USDT support is [automatically] compiled in). On Debian-like systems you can install the package`systemtap-sdt-dev` (this is not documented yet).

Reviewer 2: typo: It's sys/s**dt**.h

Reviewer: Thanks @mzumsande, fixed with d3a3b632573811a9e356041c7b7824e39e0318aa.
